An armored champion cut down his rival on a frozen field in the desert.
That was how the Stanley Cup finals started, with a Las Vegas-worthy display designed to turn T-Mobile Arena into a caldron of support for the Golden Knights.
The pregame show turned out to be prophetic. Basking in the fanfare and the cheers of fans, the team took down its opponent, the Washington Capitals. But two nights later, after the same ceremony, the Vegas Golden Knights foundered in a 3-2 loss.
The games ended the way they did because of factors too complex to tease apart. But their outcomes illustrated a well-established trend in the N.H.L.: The advantage of playing at home that bolsters teams in sports like basketball and football does not apply much in hockey.
“It’s a pretty big difference,” said Tobias Moskowitz, a co-author of the book “Scorecasting,” which examined the influence of home-field advantage. “You could think of it as twice as large in basketball as it is in hockey.”
Home advantage is a phenomenon in all major sports. In the N.B.A., for example, teams have historically won more than 60 percent of their home games.
Over the last 10 years, however, home teams in the N.H.L. have won roughly 55 percent of the time, according to data from Hockey Reference. Their prospects tend to be worse in the postseason. This season was somewhat of an anomaly: Home teams actually lost more than half of the time in the N.H.L. playoffs, winning under 47 percent of the games before the finals.
Before winning two games at home to take a 3-1 series lead in the Cup finals, the Capitals were 4-5 at Capital One Arena during the playoffs. They can win the Stanley Cup on Thursday night with a victory on the road, where they are 9-3 in the postseason.
This gap in home advantage between the N.H.L. and the N.B.A. has persisted over the years despite similarities in the leagues’ formats. Their regular seasons run for 82 games, roughly from October to April; 16 teams make the playoffs; and to advance, the teams need to win best-of-seven-game series.
In addition, the two sports lack the regular stoppages in play of football and baseball, and games revolve around five players responsible for both offense and defense.
So why don’t hockey teams enjoy a lift on home ice?
The prevailing view among economists and statisticians is that home advantage in all sports exists mainly because of referee bias. Mr. Moskowitz and others have written that noisy fans and announcers do not have much impact in terms of distracting or demoralizing visiting players. But statistically, they do cause officials to make calls that favor the home team in tricky situations, including many pivotal ones.
“Obviously the referees play a role, and it’s subconscious on their behalf,” Aaron Schatz, the editor in chief of Football Outsiders, said. “They don’t mean to favor the home team.”
Eric Tulsky, the manager of hockey analytics for the Carolina Hurricanes, said: “You have to be really sure of yourself when you know that everybody around you thinks one thing to say, ‘No, it’s actually the opposite.’ So the home team ends up getting some borderline calls, just because hearing other people’s opinions influences you.”
If officials can be swayed by their surroundings when making tough decisions, one key difference may be the way that fouls are called in basketball and hockey.
“In an N.B.A. game, a referee could literally call a foul on every play if they wanted to,” Mr. Moskowitz said. “Their influence on the game is definitely higher.”
Michael Lopez, an assistant professor of statistics at Skidmore College, said there was a cumulative effect to foul calls within a basketball game.
“On an individual play level, the magnitude of the home bias is very small, but when you add up all those small plays across the course of the game, that’s where you get a pretty big, dramatic effect,” he said. “In hockey, just by the nature of the sport, they can’t make that many calls in a game.”
Of course, N.H.L. officials can still affect a game in significant ways. One call leading to a power play can easily produce a goal, and in low-scoring sports like hockey, one goal can decide a game.
But the fact that one event like a goal or a power play can be so crucial is another reason that the home advantage in hockey is less pronounced.
Studies have found that, compared to other sports, hockey is highly affected by randomness. For even the best hockey teams, just one unlucky bounce or one improbably good play by their opponent can result in a loss.
Because random events can help weaker teams sneak past stronger opponents more often in hockey, in any given season, even many of the most talented teams in the N.H.L. win just over half their games.
“In basketball, where teams are going to have 50 scores each or whatever it is, there’s a lot more chance for one good play to get evened out by the other team being better,” Mr. Tulsky said.
One way analysts have studied randomness in hockey is by watching the performance of goalies.
“In a regular season, your worst goalie is going to block about 86 percent of shots and your best goalie is going to block about 93 percent, and that’s the whole spread,” David Berri, a professor of economics at Southern Utah University, said. “It’s basically every goalie blocks nine out of 10 shots.”
As a result, lucky saves and fluky errors can be the deciding factor in many hockey games. That may offset some of the advantage of playing at home.
“If a lot of what decides the outcome is who happens to make a play on any given night, that’s not going to be dominated by a home-ice advantage,” Mr. Tulsky said.
So as the Stanley Cup finals and the N.B.A. finals wear on, the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Golden State Warriors may justifiably feel a bit more at ease within the walls of their own arenas. But the Capitals and the Golden Knights probably shouldn’t feel overly comfortable competing on home ice.
“Stuff just happens,” Mr. Moskowitz said. “Luck doesn’t care about geography.”