A serendipitous stretch of N.B.A. schedule in March allowed Mike D’Antoni to be in the building when his brother Dan coached Marshall University to the school’s first N.C.A.A. tournament berth in 31 years. Mike D’Antoni’s Houston Rockets happened to be in Dallas on the same weekend that Dan’s Thundering Herd won the Conference USA championship game in nearby Frisco, Texas.
“He rejoiced as much as I did,” Dan D’Antoni said.
Dan D’Antoni reciprocated late Tuesday night with some remote cheerleading from a conference meeting in Florida as the Rockets produced the shock of the N.B.A. season by winning a 95-92 grindfest on the Golden State Warriors’ home floor, where the Warriors hadn’t lost a playoff game since Game 7 of the 2016 N.B.A. Finals. Yet Marshall’s coach was adamant that a seat in front of the television is as far as he’s willing to go — for now.
As the elder of the two bench brothers, Dan, 70, has invoked his right to make the rules and challenge Mike, 67, to reach a higher standard before he will consent to becoming an in-person presence on the Rockets’ bandwagon.
“I’ve been to the Western Conference finals a couple times,” Dan D’Antoni said in a phone interview. “I told him you have to get past that and then we’ll come and watch.”
It took a dozen years for Mike D’Antoni just to get back to the conference finals, after those two trips Dan referenced with the Phoenix Suns in 2005 and 2006. Subsequent flameouts with the Knicks and the Los Angeles Lakers had temporarily ushered him out of the business, but Mike is making more playoff noise with these Rockets than he ever did in Phoenix — in what has to rank as the standout season of his coaching career.
Just like Dan’s.
The series (and very likely the rest of the N.B.A. season) was realistically over if Houston hadn’t overturned a 10-point deficit entering the fourth quarter to swipe Game 4 on the road. With a 3-1 lead, Golden State would have been a monstrous favorite to secure a fourth successive trip to the N.B.A.’s championship series and then an off-the-board lock to undress whoever prevails in the East finals, which find the precocious Boston Celtics holding a 3-2 edge over LeBron James’s Cleveland Cavaliers.
Now? The Rockets still have plenty to do at 2-2, but they’ve successfully shoved the Warriors into their first true crisis since the signing of Kevin Durant by reducing this to a best-of-three series in which two of the three potential games are scheduled to be played in Houston. And no Rocket is having a more redemptive series than D’Antoni, who continues to defy his old Phoenix reputation — too gimmicky to ever prevail in the postseason — by showing skeptics he’s far more adaptable than we ever realized.
It required a stark departure from his Seven Seconds Or Less days with the Suns, but D’Antoni did what great coaches are supposed to do this season by tailoring his system to fit the strengths of his two best players. Although Houston set a new league record for 3-point attempts for the second successive campaign, D’Antoni also deferred to the specific talents of James Harden and Chris Paul to the point that the Rockets ranked No. 1 in isolations per game and 30th in passes per game while dipping from third to 14th in pace.
“Different players morph the system,” said Dan D’Antoni, who served as an assistant to Mike with the Suns, Knicks and Lakers before taking over at Marshall. “It’s different than Phoenix because you’ve got different players; Houston has two dominant one-on-one players.”
The Rockets also piled onto their flight back home Wednesday basking in a playoff win that legitimately hinged on Houston’s defense — something D’Antoni’s Suns scarcely had the opportunity to say. No one is quite sure how either team will cope with its mounting fatigue, but Houston’s rampant switching and desperate aggression in Game 4 clearly flustered the Warriors in a way this league hasn’t seen since Cleveland completed its historic comeback from 3-1 down to win that Game 7 at Oracle Arena. That’s the loss, of course, that chased Golden State right onto Durant’s trail in free agency.
“To beat these guys,” Dan D’Antoni said, “they have to feel Houston.”
Mike D’Antoni’s many critics over the years never imagined he could be the sort of coach to inspire such a response. Yet that’s just what he got after borrowing from the Gregg Popovich playbook by publicly branding his team “soft” in the wake of Houston’s 41-point humiliation in Game 3.
“Mike has never shied away from defense,” Dan D’Antoni said. “People forget he was a great defensive player when he played. In Europe, he was known as — what’s the name of that famous highway thief in France?”
Dan was referring to the fictional Arsène Lupin.
“That was Mike’s nickname because he stole the ball so much,” Dan said.
But big brother has noticed a change from little bro’s desert stint. A significant one.
According to Dan D’Antoni, Mike is at last the carefree rebel in Houston that so many of us assumed him to be in Phoenix. With the Suns, whenever they pondered becoming even more freewheeling offensively, Mike resisted the thought of greenlighting more 3-pointers or asking his pass-first quarterback, Steve Nash, to shoot more.
“We’re almost identical, but he’s a little more measured,” Dan D’Antoni said. “Mike sometimes didn’t have the confidence I had. You’d think he’d have way more confidence, but I don’t think he did back then. He would be measured a little bit in everything he did.
“My feeling was, ‘Let it all hang out and things will work out.’ I think that’s what you’re seeing now. He feels comfortable in his own skin. He just decided to be who he is. When the tie came off and the mustache came off, you’re seeing the real Mike D’Antoni.”
The clean-shaven, open-collared Houston D’Antoni backs up the bulk of that account, acknowledging that being “more secure in myself” allows him “to push the envelope more than we could in Phoenix.”
“Back then it was, ‘Are we doing the right thing?’ ” Mike D’Antoni told me late in the regular season. “We were worried that we took too many 3s, which the analytics guys now say might not even be possible. We took a lot of 3s and people questioned it. You didn’t post up and people questioned it. They don’t now.
“We’re playing more freely because we know we’re using the right formula. Back then it was, ‘We think we’re using the right formula, but we’re not sure.’ And it gets to you after a while.”
Of course, after all these years — and so much external criticism to drown out the praise that routinely comes from peers like Golden State’s Steve Kerr — both D’Antonis know what to expect should Houston backslide from here.
D’Antoni absorbed more than the usual second-guessing after both of Houston’s defeats in this series. Postseason glory, furthermore, has routinely eluded all of the Rockets’ headliners: Harden, Paul and their coach. So the triumvirate is sure to be collectively skewered if what seemed like such a breakthrough in Game 4 is followed up by the Warriors reclaiming home-court advantage by seizing Game 5 — especially with Andre Iguodala (leg) and Klay Thompson (knee) carrying injuries that have exposed the reigning champions’ lack of wing depth.
“Mike always took a lot of heat, but I think that’s why he’s in Houston,” Dan D’Antoni said. “He didn’t want to leave the game with the taste he had.”
Dan, for his part, resists any attempt by pesky sportswriters who dare to try to grade Marshall’s 25-11 season in his fourth year in charge against Mike’s second season with the Rockets. Mike was a freshman at Marshall in November 1970 when a plane carrying the school’s football team crashed, killing 75 passengers. Dan was coaching Mike as a Marshall assistant at the time.
“It goes even deeper than the brother connection,” Dan D’Antoni said of their shared affinity for the university. “We never compete against each other. That’s irrelevant to us. When it’s all over, we’re going to be known as pretty good coaches — whatever happens in these next few games.”