In a vote of his peers, Dwane Casey of the Toronto Raptors has been selected as the National Basketball Coaches Association’s coach of the year for the 2017-18 season — while Brad Stevens of the Boston Celtics stunningly failed to win a single vote from fellow coaches.
The N.B.C.A. introduced its own Coach of the Year Award last season, based on polling of the league’s 30 head coaches after the regular season, and Casey was announced Wednesday as the winner just two days after the Raptors were swept out of the playoffs by the Cleveland Cavaliers. The award is separate from the N.B.A.’s Coach of the Year Award, which is voted on by members of the news media.
[Related: Raptors Fire Dwane Casey Days After He Wins Coaching Honor]
Casey and Stevens are both considered top contenders for the N.B.A.’s award, for which voters are asked to submit their top three selections in order.
But the N.B.C.A. ballot, according to two people familiar with voting procedures, only asks coaches to submit one name, which could help explain why there were no votes for Stevens — who has won raves leaguewide for guiding the Celtics to within one of the Eastern Conference finals entering Wednesday night’s Game 5 against Philadelphia despite the absence of his injured stars Kyrie Irving and Gordon Hayward.
According to the N.B.C.A., seven other coaches received votes in addition to Casey: Philadelphia’s Brett Brown, Houston’s Mike D’Antoni, Indiana’s Nate McMillan, San Antonio’s Gregg Popovich, Utah’s Quin Snyder, Portland’s Terry Stotts and the Los Angeles Clippers’ Doc Rivers.
Those results sparked a social media outcry Wednesday, not necessarily because Casey won after leading Toronto to a franchise-record 59 wins and the best record in the Eastern Conference, but because Stevens was completely overlooked.
The N.B.A. relies almost exclusively on members of the news media in balloting for its annual awards because it believes that they comprise the voting body that will be the most thorough in its research — and the least likely to let personal biases influence their selections. The league’s annual Executive of the Year award is its only season-ending honor in which each team’s top basketball executive votes as opposed to the news media; the award has long generated whispers in league circles about certain candidates struggling for votes because of frosty relationships with their peers.
But for all the praise he has received at a young age for his play-calling and impact from the sideline, Stevens, 41, is not at all regarded as the sort of self-promoter who would theoretically inspire jealousy or turn off fellow coaches.
There’s also no denying that his regular-season work, before Stevens emerged as one of the stars of the playoffs without Hayward and Irving, makes it difficult to understand the omission. The Celtics lost Hayward just over five minutes into their season opener to a gruesome leg injury and had to cope without Irving for 22 regular-season games. Irving underwent season-ending knee surgery in April.
Despite all that, Boston still managed to record 55 victories to earn the East’s No. 2 seed while fielding the league’s top-ranked defense.
Casey’s case, though, is also very strong, especially since this is an award based on regular-season achievements. The Raptors were the only team in the league to rank in the top five this season in both offensive and defensive efficiency, and Casey won plaudits for overseeing a dramatic change in the Raptors’ playing style, which emphasized a faster pace, more passing and a greater reliance on 3-point shooting.
“Dwane Casey once again maximized the Toronto roster to achieve the top record in the Eastern Conference,” Rick Carlisle, Dallas’ head coach and the N.B.C.A president, said in a statement. “Congratulations to Dwane on this prestigious recognition.”
Said Casey: “To be honored by your peers is incredibly gratifying and I am so thankful to my colleagues across the league for this recognition. I’m also grateful to the talented and dedicated coaching staff I work with every day in Toronto. To be recognized with an award that bears Michael H. Goldberg’s name is very special.”
Goldberg, the N.B.C.A.’s longtime executive director, died in 2017. D’Antoni and Miami’s Erik Spoelstra were co-recipients of the inaugural N.B.C.A. Coach of the Year Award last season.
The N.B.A.’s Coach of the Year Award, which is named in honor of Red Auerbach, will be revealed as part of the league’s second annual live N.B.A. awards show on June 25 in Los Angeles. The New York Times does not participate in voting for the awards.