The seemingly overmatched Cleveland Cavaliers are about to take on the Golden State Warriors in the N.B.A. finals. You aren’t experiencing déjà vu. You’re not stuck in an inescapable time loop. They’re really running it back again, for the fourth season in a row. Even Professor Moriarty and Sherlock Holmes didn’t face off as much.
But the cast of characters is very different on Cleveland’s side. LeBron is still LeBron — perhaps even better than before. But instead of Kyrie Irving, it’s George Hill, Jeff Green and Jordan Clarkson. And injuries will play a role: It’s uncertain what Kevin Love’s status will be as he goes through the league’s concussion protocol. On Golden State’s end, Andre Iguodala’s left lateral leg contusion doesn’t seem to be healing well.
But is the outcome inevitable either way? Will the Warriors’ big four (and Nick Young … O.K., kidding, but maybe) be too much for LeBron James? All that, and more, in our N.B.A. finals round table below with the expertise of: Candace Parker, a two-time M.V.P. forward for the Los Angeles Sparks; Marc Stein, a Times N.B.A. columnist; Harvey Araton, a Times N.B.A. contributor; Chiney Ogwumike, the 2014 Rookie of the Year forward for the Connecticut Sun and ESPN analyst; and Sopan Deb, a Times culture reporter.
MARC STEIN, NEW YORK TIMES N.B.A. COLUMNIST: Who says it’s going to be as good as last year’s? We’d all be grateful if it’s that competitive — the Warriors needed Kevin Durant at his dagger-draining best to win Game 3 and set up a 4-1 finish. Most of us are picking the Warriors in five because publicly announcing that you think a LeBron James team is about to be swept is akin to co-signing Kyrie Irving on the whole “Earth is flat” thing.
But it wasn’t an accident that the Golden State-Houston series was widely regarded as the real N.B.A. finals. The Cavaliers are nowhere near as capable as the Rockets of making this a series.
HARVEY ARATON, NEW YORK TIMES CONTRIBUTOR: It’s just too easy to dwell on the likelihood that this series will be no different from last year’s, results-wise. So let’s consider the newest wrinkle: With Kyrie Irving gone, and even if Kevin Love is good to go, LeBron is Cleveland’s lone (or lonely) star. Everything must run through him the way it has for this entire playoff season.
If that has been exhausting, it hasn’t shown in his play. Don’t feel sorry for him, either. Just know he is looking at seemingly insurmountable odds as a glorious opportunity to shock the world. At this stage of the game, he does have some Ali in him.
CHINEY OGWUMIKE, CONNECTICUT SUN FORWARD: Everyone knows the saying, “Hate that I love you.” Well, that is the 2018 N.B.A. finals summed up. After a ridiculously entertaining season, we are back at Square 1: Cavaliers and Warriors. While many people seem tired of the matchup, deep down we are all secretly obsessed with the most dominant team of our generation (Golden State) going up against the most dominant player of our generation (James).
Why does this matchup continue to drive us crazy? Because we all know the Warriors are supposed to win. And if asked a few weeks ago, most would have predicted a sweep. But why do we still love it? Because somehow James is the underdog, playing every minute of the most inspiring basketball of his 15-year career with teammates who have it together by the slimmest of margins. He is at the top of his game with absolutely zero help and zero pressure, which, by a miracle, has put the Warriors on the defensive.
CANDACE PARKER, LOS ANGELES SPARKS FORWARD: One key component is missing: Kyrie Irving. In the case of LeBron James, sometimes less is more. LeBron doing more is never a bad thing. If the Cavs can find a secondary scorer to step up consistently, LeBron can give the Cavs a chance.
SOPAN DEB, NEW YORK TIMES CULTURE REPORTER: The reason this series will be different is that it’ll be less competitive. The talent just isn’t there for the Cavaliers, even with LeBron. Think about this: Durant sat the first four minutes in the fourth quarter of a Western Conference finals game on the road and nothing happened to his team’s lead. Can LeBron sit a single minute of the finals? Even if Iguodala is out, Durant, Draymond Green and even Klay Thompson provide significant matchup challenges for LeBron. And think about the energy James will have to expend on defense. It’s not going to be pretty. It’ll be closer to Cleveland’s 2007 matchup against the San Antonio Spurs.
STEIN: Say what? Now, is there a scenario where the Cavs lose LeBron James in free agency and then pursue a wide-ranging franchise reset that potentially prompts Lue to take a leave in the name of getting healthier (after his well-chronicled issues this season) or explore his coaching future elsewhere? I suppose that is possible. But hot seat? That would be ludicrous.
I realize this league is famous for the ludicrous, but the lack of respect Lue is getting in the midst of three consecutive trips to the finals is starting to get uncomfortable.
OGWUMIKE:  Lue does not deserve to be on the hot seat. He deserves a seat right next to Celtics Coach Brad Stevens for making the most out of the least with his team.
In one of the most underrated coaching moves of the season, Lue started his most experienced bunch (including a postscandal D.N.P.-prone Tristan Thompson) for Game 7 of the Indiana Pacers series. That gamble delivered. In another crucial Game 7, Jeff Green started in place of Love, and responded with 19 points.
For better or for worse, Lue knows his guys. And so far in the playoffs, when all seemed lost, his team has come through.
ARATON: Lue’s status probably depends more on what LeBron does, or wants. If LeBron leaves as a free agent, does Cavaliers management consider Lue enough of a teacher to nurture a youth-centered rebuild? Assuming the Cavs lose the series, and LeBron somehow decides to stay, does James lobby for change for the sake of it? If the Cavs win, LeBron and John Kasich could become a bipartisan presidential ticket in 2020, with Lue as campaign manager.
PARKER: Any time you’ve made it to the finals three consecutive years and won one title, you aren’t on the hot seat. But in this world of “what have you done for me lately?” no one can be too sure their job is safe.
DEB: If LeBron tells ownership in Cleveland that he wants a different coach for him to come back, I can’t imagine Lue stays. But it’s unclear to me what LeBron thinks privately of Lue.
STEIN: LeBron’s legacy work is done for this season — unless he miraculously leads the Cavaliers to a championship no one sees coming. I will continue to say that dragging this collection of Cavaliers to the finals and surviving two Game 7s with a team this weak defensively will rank as his second-finest hour, trailing only Cleveland’s comeback from down 3-1 in the 2016 finals.
The Warriors are such overwhelming favorites that I also don’t think any of their stars can alter their overall legacies hugely — although I’m sure Stephen Curry will take unjust heat if, for the fourth successive year, he doesn’t win finals M.V.P.
OGWUMIKE: Legacies are often defined by championships, and all of the key players hitting the court for Game 1 of the N.B.A. finals already have at least one ring. But though Durant proved haters wrong by earning finals M.V.P. last year en route to his first title, the pressure is still on him. No matter how hard he tries, his move to the Bay Area made the Warriors shift from being the superheroes of the league to the supervillains. If Golden State loses the N.B.A. finals, Durant can still point to his ring, but most people will still point a finger at him for setting this impossible standard of dominance.
A perfect example of this is the scrutiny Durant received throughout his rather streaky performance during the Western Conference finals. When the Warriors win, everyone wins. But when the Warriors lose, he is the scapegoat.
Now, to the Cavaliers, and this is huge! If the Cavaliers win this series, there is a legitimate case to be made for LeBron James being the greatest player of all time. Given the task at hand and his less-than-worthy band of brothers, taking down this Warriors team would be irrefutable evidence of GOAT-manship. I don’t think Michael Jordan, Bill Russell, Kobe Bryant or Kareem Abdul-Jabbar could have saved this Cavaliers team from its tumultuous season and survived the Warriors’ “death lineup” to win a championship. This could be epic for the King.
ARATON: If the Cavs lose in the number of games (five) that would make most sense, and LeBron’s finals series record falls to 3-6, Skip Bayless and the League of LeBron Haters will scream that he is no longer fit to wear Michael Jordan’s No. 23 and demand that he surrender it immediately.
Ignore their simplistic cries for attention.
LeBron is more or less playing with house money, with the Warriors’ stars — mostly Curry and Durant — carrying the better-not-lose burden. That is, unless the Cavs get close to the upset, in the way James Harden and the Rockets did, and LeBron comes up very small in the end.
PARKER: LeBron’s legacy is cemented as one of the greatest of all time. Regardless of how this series turns out, LeBron is top three. But Steph, this could enter him into the elite discussion. He is considered one of the greatest shooters of all time, if not the greatest. But he has yet to win a finals M.V.P., and if he can string an epic finals series together, his name could enter the discussion.
DEB: Nothing’s at stake for LeBron. Ignore the yelling from the Skip Baylesses of the world. What LeBron pulled off this year was incredible. The legacy risks are all on Golden State’s side. If the Warriors lose, it’ll be one of the biggest upsets in sports history and a huge blow to Durant, who has faced questions about his competitive desire.
The Warriors are trying to become the greatest team in N.B.A. history. If they don’t win every championship for at least two more years, that legacy gets called into question. High bar, yes, but it’s one the Warriors asked for.
STEIN: The Rockets, in truth, took some cues from the Cavaliers in assembling a team of like-sized players who could switch everything defensively and make the Warriors uncomfortable by getting superphysical with them. Cleveland already knows the formula to beat Golden State: lots of 3s, slowing the pace and lots of physicality to make the Warriors grind in the half-court, which they hate. It’s simply not as easy for Cleveland to execute that plan without Irving and with a defense so porous. These aren’t the same Cavaliers.
ARATON: When LeBron dribbles away the shot clock, it’s not as painful as when Harden does. He can probe the defense with his size and sublime court vision, and force a double team, depending on where he is on the floor. Without Irving, the Cavs should get better quality 3-point looks than the Rockets did without Chris Paul. Prayers for J.R. Smith and Co. to make a fair share of them are welcomed by the citizenry of Northeast Ohio.
OGWUMIKE: Don’t keep shooting 3s if you have missed 27 in a row.
PARKER: The Cavs scored under 100 points for four of their seven games versus the Celtics in the Eastern Conference finals. Given that Boston had a top defense, the Cavs struggled to create offense, minus LeBron.
The Rockets did a great job of switching across the board and running the Warriors off the 3-point line, and their isolations, for the most part (although I hated the 500 dribbles every possession into an isolation and step-back 3), were effective in keeping the Warriors out of transition and messing up their flow and rhythm.
The Cavs have to bring their defense to this series to have a chance: Games under 100 favor the Cavs.
DEB: The Warriors have bouts of lethargy, and Curry can be exploited defensively. LeBron is more effective with the ball than Harden, so I expect there to be a strategy similar to the 2015 finals, when the Cavaliers slowed the game to a crawl and had LeBron go one-on-one as often as possible.
STEIN: Nope. The Rockets just showed us that the Warriors have some depth issues and structural flaws that make them — get this — human. The Celtics will also soon have the sort of talented and switch-happy squad that can give Golden State serious trouble when Gordon Hayward and Irving rejoin the crew that just came within one win of the finals.
And if you thought focus, complacency and outright boredom were issues for the Warriors this season, imagine what they’ll be like after a third title in four seasons. I’m not buying the argument that the league should just fold if the Warriors win again. Sorry.
ARATON: I always remind people that the N.B.A.’s greatest growth period was the 1990s, when Jordan and the Bulls won six titles in eight years (and might well have won eight had Jordan been able to satisfy himself belting Wiffle balls in the yard).
The league has also seen its television ratings and popularity grow during the Warriors’ rise. Superteams in this sport are usually a blessing. And even if the basketball world tires of Curry’s shimmy and dangling mouth guard, the Celtics are coming. Or maybe LeBron’s going to Houston. Or to Philadelphia’s Social Media Sixers.
OGWUMIKE: The Warriors have had the answers to the pop quiz that you didn’t know was happening in class today. In other words, the Warriors knew the game was heading in the direction of two very important things: positionless basketball and points. At an early stage, Golden State started grooming talent that was highly skilled at various positions and could mold seamlessly together on both ends of the floor. In less than 10 years, the Warriors’ staff took a group of misfit, underappreciated draft talent and turned them into All-Stars, All-N.B.A. performers and even defensive players of the year.
Golden State also foresaw, à la Miss Cleo, that there would be stricter enforcement to rules that would enable “freer movement for guards,” which means “more protection for shooters,” which means “more points.” And “more points” means “more fun,” which means “more fans,” which means “more money.” So the Warriors’ gamble by going all-in on these dynamic changes to the game paid off. (Remember that new arena?)
Meanwhile, everyone else is playing catch-up, which is frustrating. Some people think it is unfair for the Warriors to be this good. Those people must not recall the ’90s Bulls era, because history in this case is likely to repeat itself.
PARKER: Every decade, this conversation is raised regarding dominance. The N.B.A. will adjust and continue to be exciting. Both conference finals went to Game 7, so I do not see this becoming a problem.
DEB: A resounding yes. It’s a problem when a fan base considers the conference finals to be the real championship. Two things can be true: The N.B.A. is providing its highest quality product in several decades, with the most likable and talented stars in its history. Also, a 73-win Warriors team adding a top-five player after coming within a minute of winning a second championship is problematic and causes fans to tune out.
Yes, I’m aware the ’90s Bulls won six championships. This feels different. Michael Jordan was older. There was some fallibility. I’m also aware that the Rockets just pushed the Warriors to seven games while missing their star point guard for two games. O.K., but I didn’t seriously believe the Rockets were going to win — and most of the games weren’t competitive.
STEIN: The key to whatever success is within Lue’s grasp may actually be Golden State’s Andre Iguodala, who has been ruled out for Game 1 thanks to the lower leg contusion that knocked him out of the last four games in the Western Conference finals. Iguodala’s absence denies the Warriors their best LeBron disrupter as well as their smartest player both offensively and defensively. The teams’ respective comfort levels rise and fall considerably with Iguodala in or out of uniform.
ARATON: Crucial for Lue is to have, as often as possible, a defender who can effectively jam Curry on the high screen, as Tristan Thompson was able to do two years ago. Mike D’Antoni committed Game 7 suicide by treating Curry to a few second-half minutes of Ryan Anderson. (Oy!) Larry Nance Jr. must defend in switches as well, while George Hill, Kyle Korver and J.R. Smith have to at least compete with the Warriors’ explosive backcourt. Kerr’s mission is to determine how hard to, or not to, double-team LeBron, depending on what he sees developing.
If Love is healthy, he requires an active defender (Durant or Draymond Green) to chase him on the perimeter. If Iguodala can’t provide big minutes, foul trouble on the player who guards LeBron could be an issue, especially if it’s Durant. The Warriors’ slogan is “Strength in Numbers.” But as Jeff Van Gundy has grown fond of saying, they really are more about strength in stars, three of whom happen to be the most explosive shooters in the game.
OGWUMIKE:  Lue has to have seen what D’Antoni saw in the Western Conference finals. When Houston was physical with Golden State, its shooters, especially Curry, struggled. The unfortunate part is that D’Antoni stuck to his offensive game plan when he should have stuck to his defensive.
And, similarly, Kerr will have to answer one question that centers on defense: How do you stop a player who cannot be stopped? The only logical answer is: You don’t. Just outscore him.
PARKER:  If I’m Lue, I open this series the way I did in Game 3 against the Celtics when they were down, 2-0. You need George Hill, Kevin Love, J.R. Smith and Kyle Korver to be aggressive and make shots. LeBron will be LeBron, but he needs help. Switch on the perimeter; lower-scoring games are in their favor.
If I’m Kerr, every day since the Western Conference finals I would have preached taking care of the ball and ball movement. If they do those two things, there is no one at their absolute best that can beat this team four out of seven tries.
DEB: For Lue: Pray, and have faith in LeBron. If there was ever a series that Kevin Love was essential, assuming he is healthy, this is it. He shot 39 percent from the field in last year’s finals to average 16 points and 11 rebounds a game. Not awful, but Cleveland needs more. One distinct advantage Cleveland also has: It can go big with a Thompson-Love-James lineup. But it’s not 1995 anymore, so overpowering in the paint is a very difficult strategy to execute.
For Kerr, don’t overthink it.