A lawyer for Sterling Brown, the Milwaukee Bucks player who was subdued with a stun gun following a parking violation, said he intended to file a federal civil rights lawsuit on Mr. Brown’s behalf.
In an episode that drew swift condemnation and an apology from the Milwaukee police chief, Mr. Brown, 23, was approached by police officers when he left a store on Jan. 26. The officers said Mr. Brown’s car was parked in a handicapped zone, and the situation quickly escalated, with multiple officers from several police cars becoming involved.
Body camera footage from the officers, which was released in May, showed Mr. Brown remaining calm throughout the incident. But several officers surrounded him and forced him to the ground, using a stun gun to subdue him. At a Bucks game the next day, in which Mr. Brown played, he had visible cuts and bruises on his face.
Mark L. Thomsen, the lawyer representing Mr. Brown, had intended to file the lawsuit on Friday, but it was pushed back late Thursday for unspecified reasons. When the lawsuit is filed, Mr. Thomsen will hold a news conference at Milwaukee’s City Hall.
The reaction to the initial release of a video of the episode was swift, with many condemning the behavior of the officers. Milwaukee’s police chief, Alfonso Morales, said he was “sorry this incident escalated to this level.”
Chief Morales said a department investigation of the events revealed that “members acted inappropriately and those members were recently disciplined.” Three officers received unpaid suspensions — penalties of 15, 10 and two days — and eight others received more training.
Mr. Thomsen’s announcement of the intention to file a lawsuit came after various news outlets released additional footage of the incident. The new videos include footage and audio of Mr. Brown confronting one of the officers about purposefully stepping on his ankle.
Mr. Brown asks the officer why he would do that, and the officer responds, “So you don’t kick us.” The officers can also be heard in the videos discussing Mr. Brown’s status as an N.B.A. player, and the likelihood that the episode would blow up and be seen as racially charged once it became public.
According to reports from The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Chief Morales and Milwaukee’s mayor, Tom Barrett, said they have not yet seen the additional footage. In that report, Mr. Barrett said he had requested a change in how body camera footage is released in the future.
When the first wave of videos was released, Mr. Brown issued a statement saying, in part, “This experience with the Milwaukee Police Department has forced me to stand up and tell my story so that I can help prevent these injustices from happening in the future.” He also said in an interview on “Good Morning America” on May 25 that he would eventually file a lawsuit with a goal of holding “the officers accountable, hold future officers accountable.”
Adam Silver, the N.B.A.’s commissioner, discussed the incident on May 31 at his annual news conference before the N.B.A. finals. Mr. Silver said he had discussed the episode both with Mr. Brown, and with Mr. Brown’s father, Chris, who was a police officer in Chicago for 30 years.
Mr. Silver said the N.B.A. had tried to create a dialogue between its players, their communities, and the police officers in those communities to prevent these situations from happening, but he acknowledged that “when we see a video like with Sterling Brown with that young man, again, we realize we have a long way to go.”