It was an eventful Tuesday for the Philadelphia 76ers. The team’s coach, Brett Brown, reportedly agreed to a three-year contract extension, The New York Post reported that Ben Simmons is dating the reality television star Kendall Jenner, and, in far more serious news, Bryan Colangelo, the team’s president of basketball operations, was accused of running several anonymous Twitter accounts, some of which were posting sensitive team information.
The team, on Wednesday, said it would investigate the Colangelo situation.
The accusations, which Colangelo denied, came in an article posted to the sports website The Ringer. An anonymous tip led to an examination of similarities among five Twitter accounts: which accounts they followed and the way in which their posts were phrased.
Often referred to as burner accounts, these anonymous accounts came to the forefront when Kevin Durant of the Golden State Warriors admitted to maintaining accounts from which he had criticized his former Oklahoma City Thunder teammates. The ruse was revealed when he mistakenly posted a reply from his main @KDTrey5 account.
In Colangelo’s case, the situation appears to be more serious than Durant revealing himself to have a rather thin skin to criticism. Some of the posts he is accused of making are fairly innocuous, like ones defending his clothing choices or questioning the contract extension of Masai Ujiri, the executive who replaced Colangelo with the Toronto Raptors. But there are also posts revealing sensitive team information, including Jahlil Okafor having failed a physical that scuttled a trade — something the team never publicly revealed — and ones criticizing the team’s own players, including Joel Embiid and Markelle Fultz.
“The allegations are serious, and we have commenced an independent investigation into the matter,” the 76ers said in a statement.
Embiid, who was drafted by Colangelo’s predecessor, Sam Hinkie, responded to the story in his typical indirect manner, resulting in a flurry of replies from fans, most of which referenced Colangelo.
Embiid then acknowledged the accusations in comments he made to ESPN.
“I talked to him and he said that he didn’t say that,” Embiid said. “He called me just to deny the story. Gotta believe him until proven otherwise. If true though, that would be really bad.”
The accusations come after the team’s most successful season since 2001. Philadelphia, after years of muddling through a rebuilding effort that came to be known as the Process, finally saw the fruits of Hinkie’s labor this season with a 52-30 record. Embiid, who had missed multiple seasons with injuries, has developed into a full-fledged superstar and Simmons is the co-frontrunner for the league’s Rookie of the Year Award. A second-round exit from the playoffs was seen by many as a jumping off point for the team’s bright future, which is why the as-yet-unconfirmed contract extension for Brown made perfect sense.
While the main pieces on the 76ers roster were acquired by Hinkie, Colangelo took over following Hinkie’s resignation and filled out the team with a few veteran acquisitions like J.J. Redick, along with a trade in which Philadelphia gave two first-round draft picks to Boston in order to acquire the No. 1 pick in the 2017 draft, which they used on Fultz. That decision was celebrated at the time, but has aged poorly with Fultz barely playing as a rookie because of a hotly debated shooting breakdown. The Celtics, meanwhile, used one of the two picks they acquired in the deal to draft Jayson Tatum, who immediately emerged as one of the two best players in his draft class.
With the N.B.A. finals not starting until Thursday, the entire league was off on Tuesday, which resulted in quite a bit of chatter online among basketball journalists, players and even team executives. Daryl Morey, the general manager of the Houston Rockets, and Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks, both joked about the Colangelo accusations.
Colangelo, through a statement to The Ringer, denied ownership of the accounts that had posted troublesome material, but he did acknowledge that he has one anonymous account.
“Like many of my colleagues in sports, I have used social media as a means to keep up with the news,” the statement said. “While I have never posted anything whatsoever on social media, I have used the @Phila1234567 Twitter account referenced in this story to monitor our industry and other current events. This story line is disturbing to me on many levels, as I am not familiar with any of the other accounts that have been brought to my attention, nor do I know who is behind them or what their motives may be in using them.”
The Ringer article said their investigation was a result of a reporter receiving a direct message on Twitter about the accounts, with a claim that the whistle-blower had worked in artificial intelligence and had used an open-source data analysis tool to link the suspect accounts.
“They all have a pattern of likes, follows, and tweets which are extraordinarily similar,” the message said. The Ringer’s investigation then revealed much of that to be true, with the accounts all having followed people with personal ties to Colangelo, and the messages being remarkably similar in content and tone.
When the team was contacted about two of the accounts, but not the other three, the three accounts that had gone unmentioned all were quickly switched from public to private, including one that had not been active in several months.
Colangelo, 53, is a two-time winner of the league’s Executive of the Year Award. He was formerly the general manager of the Raptors and Suns. He is the son of Jerry Colangelo, the former owner of the Suns.