“I say grow up.”
That is Kobe Bryant’s response to the emergent belief among some fans that his X’s and O’s analysis of N.B.A. games is getting into the heads of some players. Fans have tossed around the term Detail Curse, in reference to Bryant’s new show, “Detail,” on ESPN+, the network’s streaming platform.
The concept of the show involves Bryant highlighting a single player and trying to get into his mind-set to come up with ways he could have made more with the opportunities presented.
The evidence of a Detail Curse is mostly circumstantial, with Bryant profiling several players on teams that would go on to lose in the playoffs. But the notion that there was something to the idea of a curse got a foothold when Jayson Tatum, the 20-year-old rookie for the Boston Celtics, discussed how obsessed he had become with Bryant’s breakdown of his game.
“I’ve probably watched it like 25 times already,” Tatum said in advance of Game 3 of the Eastern Conference finals, “so yeah it was very helpful information.”
Tatum’s coach, Brad Stevens, also weighed in before the game, saying “Well, I think you’ve got to be careful taking it from a Laker, first of all, right?”
The earnest Stevens followed up that jab by saying “I’m kidding.”
Tatum happened to play two of his least effective games of the entire playoffs after the episode, both of which Boston lost. That rough stretch, combined with a few losses by the Golden State Warriors in the Western Conference finals following Bryant’s episode on Stephen Curry, had the black magic believers at full froth.
In an interview, Bryant discussed his show, the finals and LeBron James in advance of Game 3 of the N.B.A. finals tonight.
Your careers overlapped some, but how would a young Kobe Bryant react if a retired Michael Jordan was doing an in-depth breakdown of your game? Would you watch it?
No, I would ignore everything Michael Jordan has to say. (laughing) Of course I would watch it. I think simple-minded people tend to give simple-minded answers. The Detail Curse thing about getting into players’ heads too much is about simple-minded people who don’t understand what film study is. When you’re a player you watch film to find advantages, so you look for little areas in which you can take advantage of teams. Some of these fans that say that stuff are just idiots.
From a broader scale, it’s not just about looking at that next matchup. We don’t talk about how to win the game, that would be a three-hour “Detail” in order to break the game apart. We’re just looking at a small window of a few plays that a player could take advantage to help himself.
In a sort of a small-scale version of the show, from what you’ve seen on film, can the Cavs succeed in this finals with J.R. Smith playing the way he’s playing, or do you think Cleveland could benefit from a radical personnel change like swapping in Jordan Clarkson or Rodney Hood?
From my experience, you go with the dogs that got you to the dance. Jordan Clarkson has a lot of talent and potential, I’ve played with him and know what he can do. Rodney Hood was a 17-point-per-game scorer in the West, so I’m supposed to believe he can’t play all of a sudden? It’s just a matter of what the team chemistry is and the team dynamics are. From the outside looking in, all we can do is speculate. I’m not Ty Lue, and I’ve known Ty forever and I know there’s certain reasons why he does things. He has the finger on the pulse of what that team is doing, and as an outside observer you kind of just got to go with that flow.
That being said, if J.R. can play better I’m sure he will. He made a mistake and mistakes happen, man, whether it’s in the N.B.A. finals or not. We can sit there and ridicule it, we can talk about it and we can chastise him all we want, but the fact is it happened and now what do you do? You move on.
You played on some absolutely stacked teams, but there were a few years where you were at the top of your game but were surrounded by players who couldn’t keep up. Is that what you’re seeing with LeBron now? Is this roster a workable solution for him in an era of superteams?
It seems like he has some good talent to me. He’s got (Kyle) Korver who’s a great shooter, J.R. Smith who has always been a solid player — we focus on his one mistake and that tends to overshadow all the things he’s done to help them win a championship before — you’ve got Kevin Love, who was an All-Star and an Olympian; Rodney Hood, who was a 17-point scorer in the Western Conference; you’ve got Tristan (Thompson) who is back to playing like he played a few years ago. He’s got some workable pieces there. I don’t understand how, in order to talk about how great LeBron is we need to [expletive] on everybody else. That’s not O.K. Those guys have talent. I don’t buy this whole thing that he’s playing with a bunch of garbage.
Based on your film study of LeBron’s game and what he excels at, as we look forward to his 16th season, and without getting into the realities of contracts or anything like that, do you think there’s a team that’s an ideal fit for him basketball-wise?
Yeah, Cleveland. LeBron could go anywhere and play. If he wants to stay, that’s a great fit for him. Players can adapt. There was a lot of talk about if Durant going to Golden State was a good fit and now that seems silly to say that. Chris Paul going to Houston was ‘is it a great fit?’ and now it seems silly to say that. He’ll make a home wherever he decides to end up.
There seems to be an almost constant need to debate the greatest player of all-time and you weighed in on that concept on Twitter with a very inclusive message. Do you think the toxicity of the debates would be less if people made an attempt to enjoy all of the all-time greats?
It’s not really about enjoying them all. To me, it’s why would you waste your time debating something that you can’t definitively win? As a competitor I just don’t understand that. You can just yell back and forth at each other, you’re gonna spit stats, you’re gonna spit things that are important to you, but at the end of that debate, who won?
So you’ve won an Oscar and now you’ve created a web show with enough buzz that people are convinced it’s created a curse. What’s next?
We have projects that we’re constantly working on. We’re expanding the ‘Detail’ franchise into other sports. Detail is really focused on the elite athlete, but now we’ll have other shows that will be coming out in the near future that are more focused on children and teaching them sport values and hard work and commitment and things of that sort.