BOSTON — There could come a time when Danny Ainge’s trading of Jeff Green three years ago will be hailed as another of his celebrated capers, with the Memphis Grizzlies added to the roll call of the hoodwinked.
Every personnel move made by Ainge, the Boston Celtics’ homegrown general manager, seems to produce a victory smoke ring above the grave site of Red Auerbach, the franchise patriarch. Auerbach established the precedent of Celtics larceny in 1956 when he traded Cliff Hagan and Ed McCauley to the St. Louis Hawks for a fellow named William Felton Russell.
Let’s not argue that the Green trade actually backfired on Ainge when the Cleveland Cavaliers defeated the Celtics, 87-79, on Sunday night at TD Garden to move on to the N.B.A. finals.
Ainge had received a conditionally protected first-round draft pick, the desired part of the package for Green, who was then a starting forward. That pick won’t be realized for another two to three years.
But in becoming the proverbial LeBron James teammate who had to step up in the absence of the injured Kevin Love, Green, who played for two other teams after Memphis before landing in Cleveland in 2017, drew a painful pimple on the face of supposed executive genius.
He helped James maintain his eight-year seizure (with the Cavaliers and the Miami Heat) of the Eastern Conference throne, sending him into his ninth league finals beginning Thursday night.
“His number was called, and he just answered,” James said of Green after spending, at 33, not a competitive second in the foxhole in Game 7.
James spread 35 points, 15 rebounds and 9 assists across 48 minutes of an inelegant but compelling war of inept 3-point shooting and attrition.
Green’s contributions were 19 points and 8 rebounds as the Cavaliers ruined another splendid postseason narrative for the league’s most historically decorated franchise, which was bidding for the finals without the All-Stars Gordon Hayward and Kyrie Irving.
Quite a contrasting couple they made — the physical spectacle that is James, and Green, the Celtics’ No. 1 pick in 2007 who required open-heart surgery in 2012 to repair an aortic root aneurysm at — irony alert! — the Cleveland Clinic.
Ainge actually introduced himself as Trader Dan when he drafted Green out of Georgetown in June 2007 with the fifth overall pick and promptly moved him to Seattle in a package for Ray Allen and Glen Davis. That trade was essential to the Celtics’ 17th N.B.A. championship the following season, their first in 22 years. Ainge reacquired Green in 2011 in the dying stage of the Big Three era, beginning for Green a decampment in Boston for more than four years that included a full-season’s convalescence.
“The guy had open-heart surgery a few years ago, and the game was almost taken from him,” James said at his post-midnight news conference. His shake of the head in admiration was convincing for anyone who had overheard him speaking into a smartphone that he held in front of his face an hour earlier at his dressing stall, feet soaking in ice.
“Did you see my man Jeff Green?” James said. “Oh, man, did we need that.”
Green is 6-foot-9, offensively skilled and so effortlessly smooth that he has, perhaps unfairly, been labeled across the years as soft. He has career averages of 13.6 points and 4.6 rebounds, and is especially shifty at filling or manufacturing a lane to the rim in transition.
In other words, he is the stylistic opposite of the steamrollering James, whose return to pro basketball’s grand stage over the next two weeks will run concurrent to another itinerant late-spring force of swashbuckling royalty, Rafael Nadal, the King of Clay, gunning for an 11th French Open title.
Say what you will about the quality of Eastern Conference competition during James’s domination. Remaining haters can soothe themselves with the probability that the Cavaliers will fall short for the third time in four years, and James’s finals ledger will soon read 3 rings in 9 tries, as opposed to Michael Jordan’s perfect 6-0.
Nonsense, all of it, as much so as the ill-conceived corporate marketing campaign from a couple of decades ago declaring that Olympians don’t win silver, they lose gold.
James’s conference run has been nothing short of remarkable, given the grind of the regular season, the three best-of-seven rounds to just reach the finals and the challenge of remaining healthy during his annual playoff runs, the sum of which now equal the equivalent of three regular seasons.
Genetics have been kind to James, but there is also the indisputable matter of how dedicated he has been to his conditioning and craft. Many say, enough with the Jordan comparisons, but here is one that is altogether appropriate: They have inspired — even demanded — that their teammates put in the work.
Green signed a one-year deal with the Cavaliers this season to provide punch off the bench. Asked Sunday night what he had learned from playing alongside James, he smiled and said, “Everything.”
Mostly, he discovered that no one gets to the gym before James, or leaves later. “It’s hard to describe what he does for us — you have to see it firsthand,” Green said.
There was a period Sunday night when you wondered if anyone would stand tall alongside James to the finish, even on a night when the young Celtics couldn’t make an outside shot but figured to have youth and stamina on their side, along with an unblemished playoff record at home.
But a third-quarter flurry by James, with Green as his sidekick, floated an ominous cloud over New England. Down by 3, James fed Green with a pretty bounce pass on the break for a layup and free throw. He nailed a 3-point shot. He drove and kicked the ball out to the right corner to Green for another 3-ball. He found Tristan Thompson for a layup. He threw a pass to the Celtics’ Terry Rozier but raced back to reject him at the rim and struck a muscular pose of defiance as Green was fouled on a drive at the other end.
Limitations aside, what teammate would dare risk wasting James’s all-in effort with a lack of his own?
Noting that James’s only contrived rest came when Coach Tyronn Lue called consecutive timeouts late in the game, Green said, “It makes you want to be there for him, to help him achieve the ultimate goal.”
With this supporting cast, the odds are against that occurring over the next two weeks. The Celtics still project as heirs to James’s conference throne, and the Green trade could yet bring another key piece to future championship puzzles, another transactional trophy for Ainge.
Not yet, though. On the night of Game 7, Green answered the call, and was the one who got away.