President Trump nixed the Philadelphia Eagles’ White House victory ceremony at the last minute. He won’t even have to bother inviting this year’s N.B.A. champions.
In a display of solidarity between two of the game’s fiercest rivals, Cleveland’s LeBron James and Golden State’s Stephen Curry — despite currently facing each other in an unprecedented fourth consecutive N.B.A. finals — each took time while speaking to the news media on Tuesday to make it clear that their teams would not participate in any sort of ceremony at the White House.
The visits are a long-held tradition for the league’s champions, with President Kennedy having greeted the Boston Celtics as far back as 1963, and the Cavaliers having visited with President Obama as recently as November 2016.
“I know whoever wins this series, no one wants an invite,” said James, whose Cavaliers are down, 2-0, in the best-of-seven series. Game 3 is scheduled for Wednesday night in Cleveland.
Curry, whose opposition to a visit after winning the championship last year was cited by President Trump in his public disinvitation of the team in September, agreed with James, saying that nothing had changed as far as he was concerned. But he added that he felt the decision should be left up to individual teams.
“Every team has an opportunity to make a decision for themselves and speak for themselves,” he said. “I think that’s powerful, being in this situation.”
The topic returned to the forefront after the White House accused the N.F.L.’s Eagles of politicizing their  visit by planning to send so few players; fewer than 10 members of the team were expected to attend the event scheduled for Tuesday. Instead of the Eagles celebration, Mr. Trump held a ceremony honoring the military.
James expressed disappointment that the situation was taking away from the Eagles’ accomplishment of winning the Super Bowl.
Winning a championship in any sport, he said, “is way bigger than getting invited to the White House, especially with him in there, in my opinion.”
White House visits by sports teams have historically been nonpolitical celebrations, but they have been infused with political messaging under the Trump administration, with several prominent athletes in various sports expressing unease about participating. The situation created an alliance of sorts between James and Curry after James’s public support of Curry in the wake of a tweet by the president last year that said: “Going to the White House is considered a great honor for a championship team. Stephen Curry is hesitating, therefore invitation is withdrawn!”
Less than three hours later, James issued a response to the president:
On the same weekend he rescinded the invitation to the Warriors, President Trump had also made comments at a political rally suggesting that N.F.L. players who protested during the national anthem should be fired. That statement led to widespread protests throughout the N.F.L., with hundreds of players demonstrating during the anthem, rather than the handful that had been doing so up until that point.
The N.F.L. recently adopted a policy in which players would be allowed to remain in the locker room during the anthem but would be required to stand if they were on the field. The N.B.A., by contrast, requires its players by rule to stand during the anthem and has yet to have a player attempt such a protest.
While many N.B.A. players and coaches have been politically vocal, and have spoken in favor of the N.F.L. players, some critics have accused them of hypocrisy considering their league has an even stricter policy. On Tuesday, Curry said the difference is that the N.B.A. has been supportive of political messaging in the past, and that he is confident that support will continue.
“I would assume if somebody wanted to demonstrate or protest during the anthem,” Curry said, “that there would be an opportunity to have that discussion and understand what the player wants to express in that moment and that the league would support that player while they’re doing it.”
N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver discussed the matter at a news conference before the finals, pointing out that the rule predated not just his tenure but also the reign of David Stern, as Larry O’Brien had put the standing requirement in the rule book when he was in charge of the league. Silver said he considered the anthem a moment of unity rather than patriotism — he cited the statistic that 25 percent of the league’s players were born outside the United States — and said the league did its best to support its players through community actions.
“I’m only an observer in terms of what I see and read about what’s happening in the N.F.L.,” he said. “But our emphasis at least has been on constructive activities in our communities. There has been no discussion with our Players Association about changing our existing rule.”
The N.B.A. did not fine or punish players for wearing “I Can’t Breathe” T-shirts over their warm-ups in 2014. The shirts, which technically violated the league’s uniform policy, were a reference to the killing of Eric Garner on Staten Island.
Curry believes the important thing with all of these issues, be it anthem demonstrations or White House visits, is for the actual issues to be made clear, and for the truth to win out over political rhetoric. He cited a tweet by Torrey Smith, the former Eagles receiver, that debunked some of the claims made in the White House’s statement about the team’s disinvitation.
“I think that’s important,” Curry said. “If you focus on who is saying the right things, you shouldn’t get lost in the noise that’s going on right now.”
Curry’s coach, Steve Kerr, believes the visits — of which the Warriors made one after their title in 2015 — can resume once Mr. Trump is out of office.
“I think we all look forward to the day when we can go back to just having a celebration of athletic achievement,” he said, adding “So it will be nice when we can just get back to normal in three years.”