BOSTON — The Cavaliers gave another fine demonstration Wednesday of what might have been.
They had the makings of a lottery-ready losing team this season, if only LeBron James, their guard-forward-center-and-sometimes-coach, had not disrupted their listless rhythms with galactic level displays of scoring, rebounding and passing.
On this night in Boston when James was merely human and merely led both teams in scoring, the Cavaliers swerved wildly this way and that before pitching into a deep ditch, losing, 96-83.
With Game 6 set for Cleveland on Friday night, the Cavaliers are one more loss removed from booking beach bungalows, and, save for James and perhaps one or two other Cavaliers, who could quibble that they have earned their vacation time? Let’s not drown in statistics, as this one will suffice to push our heads underwater: Three Cavaliers starters combined for 10 points and four assists in this game.
James and his coach, Tyronn Lue, insisted that the Cavaliers played good defense, and pointed to the fact that the Celtics scored just 96 points on 36 percent shooting. Maybe, O.K., cool running but not really my dudes. This is a case of who are you going to believe, statistics or your lying eyes. Kevin Love and Tristan Thompson played stout defense at the rim, but the 3-point line was a Demilitarized Zone, drawing no Cavalier intent on contesting open shots.
For kicks, I counted at least four times in the first half when a Celtics player took a few dribbles past a teammate who had set a pick at the top of the key. Shazam! The player found himself so wide open he could have calculated angles of ascent and descent before shooting his jumper.
Most of the Celtics simply missed, a lot. Jayson Tatum, the preternaturally composed 20-year-old rookie forward, was the exception. He nailed 3-pointers and spinning fallaways. In the third quarter, he dislodged the ball from a Cavaliers guard, raced to scoop it up and turned toward the Cavaliers’ basket with James steaming downcourt to attempt one of his patented swats. Tatum, who has the wingspan of a whooping crane, flew at that basket and laid it in before James could swoop in.
It was an artful moment in a game longer on sweat and banging than aesthetics. The TD Garden at playoff time is a frenzied gladiatorial pit — if not quite as brutal as its notoriously cramped and sometimes un-air-conditioned predecessor. The fans root with demented passion, and there are all those damned championship banners hanging from the rafters. As a lifelong Knicks fan, I have to say that Madison Square Garden provides a much cleaner, almost Nordic look, with just those two championship banners.
The Celtics’ crowd was genially profane, several times serenading the Cavaliers misdemeanant J.R. Smith — who committed a dangerous intentional foul earlier in the series against Al Horford and later admitted, “I blatantly pushed him” — with a chant suggesting he committed a physically impossible act.
The heckling started before the game as Smith — who has so many tats that he could pass for Ray Bradbury’s Illustrated Man — came out to warm up. There were Celtics fans standing three rows deep in the stands, draped in their green Celtics and Vulgar-something faux Cavaliers jerseys, and they were yelling truly inventive street smack at him. Smith, who loves nothing more than to stir up trouble with the natives, appeared blissed, his earbuds in, bopping away to an invisible muse as he shot 3-point shots at so many angles.
James has cast a spell on this playoff series, which has the Celtics spending much time debating whether it makes sense to stop him or simply resign themselves to him getting his and to try to shut down everyone else.
Two hours before game time, an assistant coach opened his Apple laptop and sat with Semi Ojeleye, a muscular and athletic 6-foot-7 rookie. They studied annotated film from the last game. It had been this rookie’s fate to try to cover James, and as James scored 44 points in Game 4, this was not relentlessly upbeat viewing.
The coach was encouraging, though. Maybe shade James a little more on this drive, face up to him more on that one. Then came a play in which James spun left and then back to the right with vertiginous speed, reared back on one leg and from 19 feet shot a high arcing shot that fell through the net without a ripple.
There is a couple of seconds of silence between the two men. The coach shrugs.
Ojeleye curses softly.
Yeah, well, says the coach. Let’s move on.
They did. The Celtics came rumbling out to start the game, attacking the basket. They led by 32-19 at the end of the first quarter and by double figures at halftime. All game long, the Cavaliers toggled between the suburbs and exurbs of contention, before moving decisively to distant rural reaches in the last six minutes.
Lue was more candid than was his usual custom after the game, opining that his superstar and meal ticket, L. James, “looked a little tired to me, yes.”
More baffling was Lue’s answer to a question about why he did not use more of Kyle Korver, his sharpshooting 3-point specialist. He said that Brad Stevens, the Celtics’ coach, had mixed up his own rotations and that “kind of threw us for a loop.”
James did not seem to have his usual propulsive force, with those 6:55 p.m. Penn Central Express rumbles down the court where only a fool would try to get in his way. When Lue pulled him from the game with three minutes left, James did not sit on the bench but walked to a green clad table at the end of the bench and sat on it, as if to watch the rest of the game roll by. He drank water bottle after bottle, and repeatedly buried his face in a towel.
He is 33 and has averaged more than 40 minutes a game in these playoffs. Just perhaps, for a game, anyway, he felt his age.
He showed up at the postgame news conference in a gray hoodie, with a black cap pulled low over his face. His eyes were probing and he made no effort to pretend the season had not taken a toll. In 13 seasons in the N.B.A., he has played 232 playoff games, or nearly three extra seasons. Fatigue, he acknowledged, is a close companion in the playoffs. “I had my moments,” he said of the game and exhaustion.
A reporter asked how he would approach a possible Game 7 in Boston on Sunday. James shook his head. He can’t do that, not now. He has eyes only for the next game in Cleveland.
“That’s all I can worry about right now,” he said. “You can’t put yourself in that moment until you take care of the present.”
That’s pretty Zen, not to mention realistic. If James does not take care of this Cavaliers team, it is doubtful anyone else can.