MILWAUKEE — As officials in Milwaukee released a video showing officers using a stun gun on an N.B.A. player over a parking violation, the chief of the Milwaukee police on Wednesday declared his officers’ handling of the matter inappropriate and said that they had been disciplined for their conduct.In the 30-minute police body camera video, which the authorities had declined to release to the public since the arrest in January, a police officer can be seen confronting the player, Sterling Brown, as he emerges from a store. Mr. Brown’s car is parked in a handicapped zone, and the situation swiftly escalates into a confrontation with multiple officers and squad cars.At one point, the officers push Mr. Brown to the ground and one officer calls out “Taser, Taser, Taser,” after which a stun gun is used on Mr. Brown.During the video, Mr. Brown does not appear to raise his voice or physically resist officers.“I own this right here,” an officer says at one point. “You don’t own me,” Mr. Brown responds.In a news conference late Wednesday, the chief, Alfonso Morales, said he was “sorry this incident escalated to this level.” He said that an investigation of the events by the department revealed that “members acted inappropriately and those members were recently disciplined.” He offered no details, however, and did not provide names of the officers involved.At City Hall, Milwaukee’s mayor, Tom Barrett, said that “as a human being, I am offended by what I saw.” He said: “Mr. Brown deserves an apology, and I am very sorry the Milwaukee police treated him in the fashion he was treated.”Mr. Barrett declined to say how many officers were disciplined or describe the extent of that discipline. He said he expected that information to be released eventually, but that department procedure prevented that from being divulged immediately.In a statement, Mr. Brown said Wednesday that his treatment by the police was wrong and “has forced me to stand up and tell my story so that I can help prevent these injustices from happening in the future.”“Situations like mine and worse happen every day in the black community,” Mr. Brown said.In a separate statement, the Bucks organization, for whom Mr. Brown plays, said it supported him.“The abuse and intimidation that Sterling experienced at the hands of Milwaukee police was shameful and inexcusable,” the team’s statement said.Fred Royal, the president of the Milwaukee branch of the N.A.A.C.P., called for changes to the Police Department’s policies. “For a person to go and have to be physically accosted at the hands of police for a parking citation speaks volumes,” he said.Police conduct toward black people has been a fraught issue in Milwaukee, where protesters have held demonstrations repeatedly in recent years in the wake of police shootings and the release of videos showing rough arrests.The Milwaukee Police Association, a union representing rank-and-file officers, released a lengthy statement about the video on Wednesday evening that said “the cause or need for force is always dictated by the subject confronting the police officer.”“Unfortunately, society and local leaders only take issue when the situation is sensational, or the individual is of prominence,” the union’s statement added.Until Wednesday afternoon, few details had been made public about the arrest of Mr. Brown, who is 23, since the incident took place in January.Mr. Brown was briefly jailed but never charged with a crime. About 18 hours after his arrest, he played 27 minutes in a basketball game against the Brooklyn Nets. He had visible bruises and marks on his face.The arrest of Mr. Brown took place in the early hours of Jan. 26 outside a Walgreens store about three miles from the BMO Harris Bradley Center, where the Bucks played their home games at the time.Mr. Brown, who was in his rookie season with the Bucks, addressed the news media in January and called the situation a “personal issue.”“It’s being handled,” Mr. Brown told reporters then. “I’d appreciate if y’all would respect that right now.” Mostly a reserve, he played in 54 games, averaging 4 points and 2.6 rebounds a game.As of Wednesday, the local prosecutor’s office said it had not been involved in the case. Kent Lovern, the chief deputy district attorney in Milwaukee County, said in an email Wednesday morning that “no charges against anyone in this incident have ever been referred to this office.” Mr. Lovern said he had not seen the video before it was made public on Wednesday afternoon.Milwaukee, which has overhauled leadership of its police department in the months since Mr. Brown’s arrest, has previously struggled with relations between the police and its residents. In 2016, when an officer fatally shot a man who was fleeing, the city experienced two nights of unrest. That officer was acquitted of reckless homicide in 2017, but was convicted of several unrelated charges, including false imprisonment and solicitation of prostitutes. He is currently in prison and is no longer a police officer.On Tuesday, with word circulating that release of the video was imminent, Chief Morales released a video asking for trust in the department and pledging transparency when officers commit misconduct. (A day later, he declined to answer any questions from reporters.)Chief Morales took over as the department’s interim leader in February, about three weeks after Mr. Brown’s arrest, and was named chief in April. He replaced Edward A. Flynn, whose 10-year term as chief included struggles with high homicide rates and strained community relations.“If there’s ever an incident where one of our members makes a mistake, unnecessarily escalating a situation, I’m going to be honest and transparent about it,” Chief Morales, a 25-year veteran of the Milwaukee police, said in the video. “In those instances where we have made mistakes and are wrong, I’m sorry.”The episode in Milwaukee was among several recent encounters in which police officers were recorded using force to subdue a professional athlete.In 2017, Michael Bennett, then of the Seattle Seahawks, was taken to the ground and handcuffed by the police in Las Vegas.Months later, video captured a violent encounter between Georgia police officers and Desmond Marrow, a former N.F.L. player.Mr. Marrow, who was accused of participating in a road rage incident, was seen on the video being forced down by three officers. Mr. Marrow said “I’m not even fighting back” as he was thrown to the ground.As the video of Mr. Brown’s arrest was seen on Wednesday night, some professional athletes shared their disgust about it over social media.“I hope he sues the Milwaukee PD and the officers involved,” wrote Reggie Miller, a Hall of Fame basketball player, on Twitter.Brandon Jennings and Malcolm Brogdon, both teammates of Mr. Brown last season, each posted images on social media that said “#standwithsterling.”In the video of Mr. Brown’s arrest, he can be seen several minutes after being Tasered, standing up with his arms behind his back. He tells an officer: “You initiated everything.” The officer responds, “No, you initiated everything.”A few moments later, the officer says, “I don’t follow the Bucks, so I didn’t recognize you. I didn’t recognize your famous name.”“No, it ain’t famous,” Mr. Brown responds. “It’s legit.”